Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we
are going to be talking about water.
And more specifically, we’ll be talking
about the most popular YouTuber in
the world, MrBeast, and what has been
called “the global water crisis”.
It’s a story of celebrity, politics,
geography, poverty, mismanagement,
technology, and the liquid that
every human needs to survive.
OK then, let’s get right into it, and talk
about MrBeast and the global water crisis.
In November of 2023, the world’s most
popular YouTuber, Jimmy Donaldson,
a man you are more likely to know by
the name “MrBeast”, released a video
titled “I Built 100 Wells in Africa.”
It went instantly viral, and as of
the time of recording, it has racked
up over a quarter of a billion views.
In the video, you see MrBeast and
his team standing in villages across
Kenya, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Cameroon,
and Somalia, unveiling freshly built
wells surrounded by cheering crowds.
There are smiling children, colourful
celebrations, and people clapping
as clean water gushes out from
a tap for the very first time.
The tone of the video is upbeat and
dramatic–this is a channel known
for spectacle, after all–but the
message is clear: access to water
is life-changing, life-saving, even.
Before, as you see in the video, these
communities had to trudge for hours
every day to get water, often across
mountains, rivers, and dangerous terrain.
And even after all this, it was
often contaminated, dirty water that
would make them sick, even kill them.
Clearly, a pretty terrible situation, and
a small insight into the reality of the
estimated 1,000 children under the age
of five who die every single day through
diseases related to a lack of clean water.
But after the arrival of this
American YouTuber and his crew,
beautiful fresh drinking water could
be pumped from the ground, for free.
MrBeast claimed that these wells
would provide water for half a
million people and, with the proper
maintenance, could last for 30 years.
The video was made in the classic
MrBeast style: over-the-top
animations, short and punchy.
But it was one of his more serious
subjects, and the comment section was
flooded with people congratulating him,
saying what a good thing he had done, and
how this was a much more worthwhile use
of his time than giving people money for
staying in a circle or pressing buttons.
After all, what happened was
uplifting, inspiring, hopeful.
And, if this meant that 500,000 people
who previously didn’t have clean water
now had it, surely this was a good thing?
But, as you might imagine, it
rubbed some people up the wrong way.
And it raised some important questions.
Why did it take a YouTuber
to solve this problem?
Why does a man who made his name
giving away Lamborghinis and filming
last-man-standing challenges now
find himself doing something that
you might think governments, NGOs,
or international institutions
should have done a long time ago?
And, as we’ll come to discuss later on,
is he actually solving anything at all?
So, to the first set of questions, why
did it take a celebrity YouTuber to solve
this problem and why did these villages
not have pumps like this many years ago?
We’re not talking about high-speed
internet or access to university education
or cutting-edge cancer treatments.
We’re talking about water, the most
basic of basic needs, something
that no human being can live
more than a few days without.
And what’s more, something that
covers most of the Earth’s surface,
literally falls from the sky, and
when it doesn’t come from the sky,
can be just a few metres below ground.
After all, the wells MrBeast
built weren’t high-tech.
They don’t involve AI, space
rockets or sophisticated computing.
They’re just… wells.
They tap into groundwater — the water
stored beneath the earth’s surface — and
bring it up to the surface where it can
be used for drinking, washing, farming,
and whatever else it might be needed for.
Groundwater already existed in most
of the places he visited, and it
isn’t particularly complicated or
expensive to bring it up to the surface.
What was missing wasn’t the water; it
was the infrastructure, the funding,
and the political will to access it.
This video, and the entire well-digging
project, highlighted just a few
examples of what some journalists and
NGOs call the “global water crisis”,
the reality that today an estimated
two billion people still lack access
to safely managed drinking water.
Of course, there are many reasons
for this, and the water crisis looks
different depending on where you are.
But most of the problems can be grouped
into four very broad buckets: geography,
money, mismanagement, and neglect.
Again, this is a simplification, and there
isn’t always a neat and tidy division
between these buckets, but it’s a useful
way of thinking about the problem.
So, first, geography.
In some parts of the world, clearly,
water is naturally scarce: for every
person looking out of their kitchen
window in northern Scotland wishing it
would stop raining, there is another
somewhere else in the world who
would be over the moon to look out of
their window and see the same thing.
The oft-used example is Yemen, which
gets an average of 17 cm of rain
a year: about what some parts of
the UK might get in a single month.
But unlike the UK, Yemen doesn’t
have the infrastructure to store
and distribute water effectively.
Its capital, Sana’a, is running out
of water entirely, and some wells
are now over a kilometre deep.
There’s also another problem with
water in Yemen, which has nothing
to do with geography and everything
to do with mismanagement, but
we’ll come to that in a minute.
In other places, water might exist,
either underground or in seasonal rivers,
but not in the right place at the right
time, and without the proper facilities
to store it, it simply gets washed away.
The second bucket is money – having
the funds to pay for the infrastructure
required, whether that’s basic wells,
water storage facilities, or more
technologically advanced equipment
like desalination facilities,
where seawater is processed and
turned into clean, drinkable water.
The irony is that often the cost
to access clean water is very low.
In places where there is plentiful
groundwater–like in the areas in
MrBeast’s video–the water is often just
a few dozen metres below the surface.
It’s there, and all you need
is to drill down and get it.
But drilling costs money.
Equipment costs money.
Pipes, pumps, filters; all
of this requires investment.
Not a huge amount of money, but
governments in many low-income
countries either don’t have the
funds or don’t prioritise water
projects, especially in remote areas.
And while international aid does help, it
often comes with bureaucracy, short-term
timelines, or political strings attached.
So the result is this: water
exists, but it remains trapped
under ground, tantalisingly
close, but utterly out of reach.
The third bucket we
can call mismanagement.
Even in places where water is
available, in the form of plentiful
rivers or lakes, it often becomes
polluted and therefore unsafe: the
Ganges being a classic example.
And if it isn’t polluted, it’s often used
inefficiently, for things that simply
aren’t a good use of limited water.
Globally, around 70% of all
freshwater is used for agriculture.
Sure, agriculture is a perfectly good
use of water in some cases, but in
many countries with limited water
resources, that water is diverted
to grow cash crops like cotton,
sugar, or avocados — crops that are
water-intensive and destined for export.
I told you we’d return to the other
reason that there’s a water crisis
in Yemen, and that’s because it is
especially guilty of mismanaging
its already limited groundwater.
Around 40% of the country’s water
supply goes to growing something called
qat, which is a narcotic plant that
gives you a buzz when you chew it.
It has zero nutritional value, and
if production were banned, or if
someone waved a magic wand and all
qat production stopped, Yemen’s water
crisis might not quite disappear, but
some serious pressure would be relieved.
Now, this is an extreme example of a very
poor country that has been in a state
of violent civil war for over 10 years,
so it would be completely unreasonable
to imagine a Yemeni qat farmer should
spend any time thinking about the impact
his crop has on the water level, when
all he is trying to do is survive.
But still, qat is a major contributor
to Yemen’s water supply issues.
And there are plenty of other
examples of countries where water is
diverted towards cash crops for export
rather than domestic consumption.
The central Asian nation of Uzbekistan
is landlocked and has limited water
resources, yet it is one of the world’s
largest producers of cotton, which is
a particularly water-intensive crop.
If you are a long time listener to this
show, you might remember the role of
cotton farming in the disappearance of
the Aral Sea, from episode number 12.
Uzbekistan diverted so much water
to this thirsty crop that a large
sea simply dried up and disappeared.
So that’s mismanagement.
The fourth and final bucket is perhaps
the most frustrating of all: neglect.
Because sometimes the problem
isn’t a lack of water, or a lack of
funds, or even active mismanagement.
It’s just that nobody bothers to fix it.
Water doesn’t win elections.
It doesn’t attract headlines.
And unlike a new road, a shiny
stadium, or a government building with
someone’s name on the side, it doesn’t
make for good photo opportunities.
So politicians and planners
focus their attention elsewhere.
There are also cases where water
infrastructure was built — perhaps by a
foreign NGO or as part of an aid project
— but was then left to fall into disrepair.
Pumps break.
Filters clog.
Pipes corrode.
And because there’s no system in place
to maintain them, no local expertise or
cost-efficient way of replacing broken
parts, the community is left with nothing.
According to some estimates, between 25
and 40% of water points in sub-Saharan
Africa are no longer functioning, often
just a few years after installation.
This is the quiet tragedy of the water
crisis: it’s not always about what’s
missing, it’s about what’s been forgotten.
So, to recap, we have:
Water that exists, but
is in the wrong place.
Communities that need it, but
can’t afford to access it.
Governments that are unable — or
unwilling — to prioritise it.
And domestic and international
systems that are, at best, patchy
and short-term in their efforts.
Into this mix steps a man with a camera,
a team of editors, and a couple of
hundred million YouTube subscribers.
He builds 100 wells, attracts heaps of
praise and goodwill, and no doubt adds a
few million people to his YouTube channel.
Not so bad for a day’s work.
Now, while the video received hundreds
of thousands of positive comments,
and millions more likes and shares, it
also attracted a bunch of criticism.
Some of it was predictable internet
noise: he’s only doing it for the
views, or why did he build 100
and not 1,000, or he should have
built hospitals rather than wells.
But some raised important
ethical questions.
The first line of criticism was
about performative charity, the
idea that MrBeast was only helping
these communities on camera, for
content, and ultimately for profit.
After all, his YouTube videos make money.
A lot of money, and even if he specified
that he was giving all of the advertising
revenue away to the project, and he was
raising money for his water-based charity,
he would still benefit indirectly from it.
So, the question becomes: is
this charity, or is it a business
model disguised as generosity?
Would these wells have been built if
there were no cameras, no thumbnails,
no ad revenue, no brand sponsors?
A second criticism was
about power and agency.
Why is it that the world’s richest
countries, multinational development
agencies, and national governments failed
to act, and a private individual, with no
public accountability, stepped in instead?
Is this a celebration of generosity?
Or a symptom of a system that
has outsourced basic public
services to influencers?
And there was another layer of
discomfort — one that’s harder
to pin down, but no less real.
Some commentators felt that the
video, while well-intentioned,
fell into a familiar pattern:
The white saviour narrative.
A wealthy American flies into
African villages and solves their
problem with the wave of a wand, or
in this case, the twist of a valve.
Of course, MrBeast didn’t
invent that narrative.
And much to his credit, he didn’t
centre himself in the video as much
as someone else might have done.
But for many, the format still felt
uncomfortably close to a feel-good Western
intervention story, where local people
are recipients of generosity rather
than participants in the solutions.
Another common criticism, one often
heard in discussions about international
aid more broadly, is that giving
handouts discourages self-sufficiency.
That it risks creating dependency.
That if people grow used to others
arriving and “solving problems”
for them, they may lose the
incentive — or the confidence — to
build these solutions themselves.
How could a local well-installation
company ever compete on price with “free”?
And what incentive is there to solve
these problems if you know that there
will be handouts at some stage, even if
you might need to wait a while for them.
This argument is especially common
among critics of foreign aid: the idea
that decades of charity have created
a kind of learned helplessness, where
African governments and communities
wait for help rather than take action.
Now, although there might be
some truth here, there is also
a danger of oversimplification.
Building infrastructure like wells
does require local expertise,
materials, and maintenance.
And many communities do already
try to build and repair water
systems, with or without help.
Often, they’re just missing the capital
or political support to do so effectively.
In MrBeast’s case, it’s worth noting
that the wells were reportedly built
in partnership with local contractors
and NGOs, not just dropped in from
above, and the ongoing maintenance
and repair work of the wells will
require local expertise and labour.
Of course, the video doesn’t dwell on
that side of things; it’s a 10-minute
video intended to entertain and make
you feel good, it was never going to
go into the specifics of how everything
was delivered and will be maintained.
But this hasn’t stopped MrBeast’s critics
from arguing that this video, and the
entire project, creates an unbalanced
picture: one where progress comes from
outside, and where local people are
passive recipients of foreign generosity.
Now, to wrap things up, this is
just one video, and these 100 wells
are just a tiny step forward on the
journey of securing clean, drinkable
water for everyone who needs it.
It did do a lot to raise awareness
and money for global water projects,
and showed people that getting
clean water isn’t as complicated or
expensive as they might have thought.
According to one recent study, securing
clean water for every person on the planet
by 2030 could cost just 1% of global
GDP - about 29 cents per person per day.
It seems like a small price to pay,
especially because the benefits
greatly outweigh the cost, with this
study suggesting that every dollar
invested in water access and sanitation
brings an average of $6.80 in return.
If you ask me, it’s a good thing
that someone with MrBeast’s reach
is highlighting the problem of water
access, but it certainly shouldn’t
be theirs to fix, nor should they be
criticised for “not doing enough”.
Clearly, no single actor can solve
the global water crisis alone.
Governments carry the ultimate
responsibility to provide safe water.
NGOs and international organisations
can supply resources and expertise.
Local communities bring the knowledge
and capacity to keep systems running.
And yes, sometimes even YouTubers
with vast audiences can play a part by
raising awareness and mobilising funds.
Charity is never a substitute for strong
institutions, but when it works alongside
them, it can accelerate progress.
And at the end of the day, the real
test isn’t whether 100 wells can
be built for a YouTube video, it’s
whether we can build a world where
videos like this aren’t needed at all.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on MrBeast and the Global Water Crisis.
If you’d like to watch the video of him
digging the wells, just go to YouTube
and search for “MrBeast wells” - he is
the biggest YouTuber in the world and
you will have no trouble finding it.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Did you know about MrBeast before?
What do you think of these
kinds of massive YouTubers doing
philanthropic work in their videos?
Praiseworthy and good, deceptive and
dangerous, or somewhere in between?
you can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.